---
layout: post
author: Nikolas Pitsillos
title: 'Genaral AI & Quantum Mechanics'
date: 2020-02-02
comments: true
tags: [general AI, quantum mechanics]
---

# Introduction

Recently I was reading Jeff Clune's [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.10985.pdf "AI-GAs") and I came across the following quote:

> "The result [of evolution] is an ever-expanding, open-ended collection of new niches (challenges) and solutions to those niches (agents with a variety of skills)."

This stroke me as something quite interesting. From something small and quite simple, evolution has created every living organism we see today.  It went from something relatively simple to a complex and massively inter-dependent network of species.  As in the quote above, a solution to one niche causes niches to be exploited by other organisms and so on ad infinitum.

Now this is not only obvious in the case of biological systems; this is tremendously evident in politics and even science for example.  There are many distinct political systems and science has evolved into numerous distinct fields all with their specific areas of expertise.  The list goes on and on...

Although extremely different examples, there is a subtle relationship here: **_everythng that starts out small eventually progresses into something extremely complex_**.

For the sake of simplicity let us take the example of biological organisms.  Given the above - evolution - I begun to wonder what is the driver behind this process?  You may be also wondering what does this have to do with General AI and Quantum Mechanics?  We will eventually get there!

# On Quantum Mechanics

Now I am no expert on quantum mechanics but given that I studied physics for 2 years at university I do have a very high level view of what it entails.  However, what I want to focus on here is that, while listening to one of Sean Carroll's [MINDSCAPE](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/podcast/ "Sean Carroll's MINDSCAPE") podcast episodes (can't remember which one) but also reading part of his new book Something Deeply Hidden, I came to understand that at the most fundamental level we are all quantum systems.  We are made up of whatever "stuff" quantum systems are made up.

Through the book (I haven't read all of it yet so please no spoilers) and podcast it was discussed that what is going when a measurement occurs, at least one of the interpretations of quantum mechanics, is that we are entangled with the quantum system we are observing.  Whatever the case, which I am in no position to speculate on, I believe the key take away point here can be the fact that we can indeed think of ourselves, at the most fundamental level, as quantum systems.

Finally, if I am making a mistake here please do point it out, since we associate a certain probability to the outcome of a measurement then that means there is some inherent unpredictability or even randomness to quantum mechanics.

# On What Drives Evolution

On a different note, I initially begun to wonder about what is the driving mechanism of evolution to produce the level of intelligence that we see today.  And if we backtrack enough we can state that its a mutation in DNA.  But what makes up the DNA molecules?  That's easy, proteins, but proteins are made up of atoms which, if you go deeper, you can reach a point where the laws of quantum mechanics take over.  Thus a quantum system.

This is what strook me as quite fascinating and made me ask: Could it be that evolution, at its deepest level, is driven by this randomness of quantum mechanics?  Mutations are random afterall...

# How Does This Relate To GAI?

To provide some closing remarks I wanted to explore how this may relate to the creation of General AI.  Another question that I was asking myself while thinking about quantum mechanics was: Can we not really understand how the brain works because fundamentally we are quantum systems afterall and we don't fully understand quantum mechanics in the first place?  This can in some way give an explanation as to why the problem of General AI is so hard to solve.

At this point I didn't even have faith in myself when I was asking this question.  It does sound quite absurd but then I remembered that Sir Roger Penrose has asked a somewhat related question.

Although consiousness is not a full picture of how the brain works it still provides a fruitfull ground for research in AI.  One of the goals of AI is to build conscious systems capable of being self-aware and understand emotions, which in the most extreme case.\, can even produce General AI.

With Sir Roger Penrose's view that the brain is a quantum gravity computer, then one cannot help but wonder the following:

> **Can a unified theory of quantum mechanics and gravity provide the pathway to consciousness assuming Sir Roger Penrose's hypothesis is true?**

# Closing
Whatever I write in this posts is purely to help me in my thought process and hopefully provide me with the valuable skills to improve as a researcher.  I don't claim that I hold complete knowledge over the matters discussed.  I am merely attempting to identify questions and hopefully reach conclusions, which in effect is what a researcher needs to be doing.

I would love to hear your feedback or your opinions on the matter and I definitely encourage people pointing out my mistakes.

Thank you for reading!